---
title: "JavaScript Basic Tutorial"
date: 2019-09-29 20:00:07
description: "JavaScript Basics from a natural language perspective"
---

## Index

- Tutorial Series
- A different perspective on learning a programming language
- JavaScript Basics
  - Variables
  - Data types
  - Objects in Depth
  - Functions in Depth
- Wrap up

## Tutorial Series

This is the first of several tutorials that will teach how to build the calculator below with HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. First, we'll focus on the most 'difficult' part, that is JavaScript, so the basics of this programming language will be covered in this tutorial.

## A different perspective on learning a programming language

For a moment I want you to think that a programming language is no different than a spoken one, if you want to learn Spanish there are several approaches to achieve your goal. You can start by learning all the syntax, grammatical rules and get all on the theory, but as they say: you won't learn to swim until you get in the water.

Other tactic would be to get a full immersion on the languages, start watching movies without subtitles, change your computer and mobile language, etc., the problem with this is that you lack the fundamentals and thus slowing your leaning at the beginning.

I think that a better approach is to mix the best of both worlds and apply the Pareto Principle (20% of the input produces 80% of the output). This means learning just enough syntax and start applying that knowledge right away.

Also, I want you to notice that with a language syntax and grammar you can create different products, I mean if you learn Spanish well enough you can start writing poems, essays, novels, etc., all these creations are very different from each other, but share the same rules dictated by the language.

The above is also true for JavaScript, you can use it in different environments (the browser, a server, or as a JavaScript library) but at the end, they will all follow the same syntactical rules, to exemplify the latter let's take a look at three different pieces of code:

### Browser

```javascript
const document = window.document;
document.querySelectAll("h1");
```

### Node Runtime Environment (server)

```javascript
const fs = require("fs");

fs.mkdir("/user/Desktop/myNewDirectory");
```

### JavaScript Library

```javascript
const _ = require("lodash");

_.tail([1, 2, 3]);
```

It's ok if you don't understand any of the code above, but take a look at the patterns that are presented:

The `const` keyword, an arbitrary word (or character), then an equal sign and finally the meaning this word will have, followed by a semicolon.

What we did in the first line is called variable declaration (we'll have a deeper explanation in the sections below).

In the second line we use the declared variable followed by a `.`, after that there's another word that contains something inside parenthesis.

To better understand what's going on, let's get some theory.

## JavaScript Basics

### Variables

In programming, we use something called **variables** to store **data** with a specific name in the computer's memory, later we can access the data by calling the name of the variable.

JavaScript, has three different keywords to tell the computer we are about to declare a variable, these are:

- `var`
- `let`
- `const`

To declare a variable, you would have to type any of these followed by the name of the variable, an equal sign `=` and finally the value you want to assign to the variable.

**Example**

```javascript
var myString = "Hello World!";

let myNumber = 5;

const secondsInMinute = 60;
```

_Note: It's important to clarify that the `=` doesn't mean that our variable has been equalized to the value, rather than the value has been assigned to it._

Now you may be wondering what are the differences between the three keywords.

`var` was used in JavaScript before more modern syntax was implemented to the language and it brought a lot of trouble when programming. The problems `var` might bring are out of the scope of this tutorial, but will be addressed in future tutorials, so for now, we will avoid its usage.

`let` is used when you want to declare a variable in which the assigned value will **change** in the future, and therefore be reassigned.

`const` is used when you want a variable's value to be constant and to keep its initial **data type**, preventing from reassigning the value.

_Note: data types are the types of values that can be stored within a varible, we'll cover them in the next section_

### Data Types

As we learned in the previous section, we can store values inside variables, but what kind of values exist in JavaScript?

They are divided into two main groups:

- Primitives or Value Types
- Reference Types

#### Primitive types

**String**

Consider this as plain text. For JavaScript to recognize a string you have wrap the text in double quotes `"your text"` or simple quotes `'your text'`, what you choose doesn't affect JavaScript's abilty to identify a string.

```javascript
const myString = "Hello World";
```

**Number**

It is any number, including numbers with decimals. Unlike strings, you don't need any wrapper for the value, you just type it. If you wrap a number in quotes it will be treated as a string and not as the numeric value it represents.

```javascript
const myNumber = 5;
const myOtherNumber = 6.789:
const notANumber = '10';
```

**Boolean**

This as a binary value, a boolean can only be a `true` or `false`.

```javascript
const amILearning = true;
const isThisBoring = false;
```

**undefined**

This data type, is the way of the computer to tell you that you have a varible which contains no value or that you are trying to access an undeclared variable.

**null**

#### Reference Types

**Object**
The object, is a collection of elements that are listed in key, value format. Think of it as a variable that can store other varibles in a directory-like structure. They key would act as a variable name, and the value is just, well, the value. You can store any of the previous data types we saw inside an object key, including other objects.

```javascript
const myObject = {
  myString: "This is my value",
  myNum: 5,
  isInsideAnObject: true,
  nestedObject: {
    isNested: true
  }
};
```

**Arrays**
It is an unordered collection of any data types.

```javascript
const myList = [1, "hello", {}];
```

**Functions**

This is a contained block of code that can be called multiple times and performs a specific task.

```javascript
function addNums(numOne, numTwo) {
  return numOne + numTwo;
}

const sumOne = addNums(3, 4); //sumOne would have the value of 7
const sumTwo = addNums(4, 10); //sumOne would have the value of 14
```

Down below we have a section explaining functions in depth.

### Object Literals In Depth

### Functions In Depth
